# Structural bioinformatics studies of glutamate transporters and their AlphaFold2 predicted water-soluble QTY variants and uncovering the natural mutations of L->Q, V->T, F->Y and vice versa

Integral transmembrane proteins including the glutamate transporters are notoriously difficult to study. Glutamate transporters play a key role in human physiology in their role of excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain, when it is malfunction, resulting in many neurological and other physiological disorders. Here we present the structural bioinformatic studies of glutamate transporters. These include 8 structures determined by X-ray crystallography, cryo-EM, and predicted by AlphaFold2 and their water-soluble QTY variants. In the native structures, there are hydrophobic amino acids leucine (L), isoleucine (I), valine (V) and phenylalanine (F) in the transmembrane helices. These hydrophobic amino acids are systematically replaced by hydrophilic amino acids glutamine (Q), threonine (T) and tyrosine (Y). Therefore, these QTY variants become water-soluble, four have identical isoelectric focusing points (pI) and other four have very similar pI. We also present the superposed structures of native glutamate transporters and their water-soluble QTY variants. The superposed structures show remarkable similarity with RMSD 0.528Å-2.456Å despite significant protein transmembrane sequence differences (41.1%->53.8%). We also show the differences of hydrophobicity patches between the native glutamate transporters and their QTY variants. We also found the that in the glutamate transporters there are many natural mutations of L->Q, V->T, F->Y and Q->L, T->V, Y->F. Some of these natural mutations are silent mutations and others result in neurological disorders. Our bioinformatics studies not only provide insight into the differences between the hydrophobic helices and hydrophilic helices including the glutamate transporters but will also likely stimulate further study of other water-soluble transmembrane proteins.
